Monitor template variables for all attributes & tags (#11866)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/notify/variables.md

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Notification message enrichment

### Attribute and tag variables

> #### Multi-alert tag variables

Reviewer: We should likely add a screenshot to illustrate this

For example, if your monitor triggers for each `env`, then the variable `{{env.name}}` is available in your notification message.

For any `key:value` tag, the variable `{{key.name}}` renders `value` in the alert message. If a group is tagged with multiple `values` associated with the same `key`, the alert message renders a comma-separated string of all values, in the lexicographic order.

Variable content is escaped by default. To prevent content such as JSON or code from being escaped, use triple braces instead of double braces, for example: `{{{event.text}}}`.

##### Query group by host

If your monitor triggers an alert for each `host`, then the tag variables `{{host.name}}` and `{{host.ip}}` are available as well as any host tag that is available on this host.
To see a list of tag variables based on your tag selection, click **Use message template variables** in the **Say what's happening** section.
Some specific host metadata are available as well:

- Agent Version : {{host.metadata_agent_version}}
- Machine : {{host.metadata_machine}}
- Platform : {{host.metadata_platform}}
- Processor : {{host.metadata_processor}}

> ##### Query group by a facet

Reviewer: Not sure that this one should be its own section. It's definitely part of the group by element and is a common case that should show up before the group by host which is a specific one.

Reviewer: We could potentially use tabs to get tags and attribute template variable separated instead of two sections. WDYT?

Log monitors, Trace Analytics monitors, RUM monitors and Event monitors can use facets as variables if the monitor is grouped by the facets.
For example, if your log monitor is grouped by the `facet`, the variable is:

```text
{{ @facet.name }}
```
**Example**: To include the information in a multi alert log monitor group by `@machine_id`:

```text
This alert was triggered on {{ @machine_id.name }}
```

If your facet has periods, use brackets around the facet, for example:

```text
{{ [@network.client.ip].name }}
```

#### Matching attribute/tag variables

_Available for [Log monitor][1], [Trace Analytics monitor][2] (APM) and [RUM monitor][3]_

> To include **any** attribute or tag from an event matching the monitor query, use the following variables :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To include **any** attribute or tag from **one** event matching the monitor query, use the following variables :
```

| Monitor type    | Variable syntax                                         |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| RUM             |  `{{rum.attributes.key}}` / `{{rum.tags.key}}`          |
| Trace Analytics |  `{{span.attributes.key}}` / `{{span.tags.key}}`        |
| Log             |  `{{log.attributes.key}}` / `{{log.tags.key}}`          |

For any `key:value` pair, the variable `{{log.tags.key}}` renders `value` in the alert message.

> **Example**: if a log monitor is grouped by `@error.code`, to include the error message in the notification message, use the variable :

Reviewer: Let's do an example section and add screenshot to illustrate the example

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Notification message enrichment

### Attribute and tag variables

> #### Multi-alert variables

Reviewer: I'm a big fan of Screenshots to illustrate something, we should likely find a way to show the group by in the query and the notification message using its value.

> Multi-alert variables can be used in [multi-alert monitors][1] based on the dimension selected in the multi-alert group box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use multi-alert variables in [multi-alert monitors][1] to enrich your notification message based on the dimension selected in the multi-alert group box.
```

Reviewer: Crusade against `can`

Author: changing this one 👍

> Enrich notification to dynamically include the value associated with the group by dimension in each alert.

Reviewer: Doesn't this sentence repeat the first one? We should likely merge the two.

> ##### Query group by tag

Reviewer: Let's do two tabs: tags and attributes instead of two sections. 

As the two is the exact same behaviour, the only difference is that for attribute a @ is required. However the @ is included in the query path so in a way it's the same thing but is worth calling out. 

WDYT about using tabs instead?

| Monitor type    | Variable syntax                                         |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| RUM             |  `{{rum.attributes.key}}` / `{{rum.tags.key}}`          |
| Trace Analytics |  `{{span.attributes.key}}` / `{{span.tags.key}}`        |
| Log             |  `{{log.attributes.key}}` / `{{log.tags.key}}`          |

For any `key:value` pair, the variable `{{log.tags.key}}` renders `value` in the alert message.

**Example**: if a log monitor is grouped by `@error.code`, to include the error message in the notification message, use the variable :

```text
{{ log.attributes.[error.message] }}
```

The message renders the `error.message` attribute of a chosen log matching the query, **if the attribute exists**.

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: If the picked event does not contain the attribute or the tag key, the variable renders empty in the notification message. To avoid missing notifications, using these variables for routing notification with {{#is_match}} handles is not recommended.</div>

> ##### First level attributes

Reviewer: Should we call this as Special attributes or Reserved attributes? First level sounds strange.

Logs, spans and RUM events have generic first level attributes, that you can also use in variables following the following syntax :

| Monitor type    | Variable syntax                       | First level attributes |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------|

> | RUM             | `{{rum.key}}`                         | `service`, `status`, `timestamp` |

Reviewer: We likley don't want to highlight timestamp there though. Because it will be a epoch ms value which is barely usable.

Author: do we want to remove it from the available top level attributes ?
I'd say it's up to RUM team to decide this

| Trace Analytics | `{{span.key}}`                        | `env`, `operation_name`, `resource_name`, `service`, `status`, `span_id`, `timestamp`, `trace_id`, `type` |
| Log             | `{{log.key}}`                         | `message`, `service`, `status`, `source`, `span_id`, `timestamp`, `trace_id` |

If the matching event does not contain the attribute in its definition, the variable is rendered empty.

##### Explorer link

Use `{{log.link}}`, `{{rum.link}}` and `{{span.link}}` to enrich the notification with a link to the log, rum or trace explorer, scoped on the events matching the query.

> #### Check monitor variables

Reviewer: Sounds like we should use Tabs instead of sections to put them on the same level.

For check monitor variables (custom check and integration check), the variable `{{check_message}}` is available and renders the message specified in the custom check or the integration check.

> #### Composite monitor variables

Reviewer: Let's use tabs for this as well no?
